README.md, before:

# RAG Assignment Backend

A robust backend service for a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system, built with Node.js, Express, and OpenAI.

## Repository

[https://github.com/phaneendra/rag-assignment-backend](https://github.com/phaneendra/rag-assignment-backend)

## Overview

This service handles:

1.  **Web Scraping**: Extracting content from URLs using Puppeteer.
2.  **Vector Storage**: Embedding and storing document chunks in ChromaDB.
3.  **Chat Completion**: Answering user queries using context retrieved from the vector store via OpenAI.
4.  **History Management**: Persisting conversation history in SQLite.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js (v18+)
- Docker & Docker Compose (for ChromaDB)
- OpenAI API Key

## Setup Instructions

### 1. Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/phaneendra/rag-assignment-backend.git
cd rag-assignment-backend
```

### 2. Install dependencies

```bash
npm install
```

### 3. Environment Configuration

Create a `.env` file in the root directory:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Ensure the following variables are set:

```env
PORT=5001
DATABASE_URL="file:./dev.db"
OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
CHROMA_DB_URL="http://localhost:8000"
```

### 4. Run the Application

#### Option A: Local Development (Recommended)

Use this method for faster feedback loops.

1.  **Start ChromaDB**:
    ```bash
    docker compose up -d chromadb
    ```
2.  **Start the Server**:
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```
    This command automatically runs database migrations and starts the server in watch mode.

#### Option B: Docker Compose (Full Stack)

Run the entire backend stack (App + ChromaDB) in containers.

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
```

The API will be available at `http://localhost:5001`.

## Design Decisions & Tradeoffs

### Architecture: Express & Node.js

**Decision**: Used Express for its simplicity and huge ecosystem.

### Database: SQLite & Prisma

**Decision**: SQLite was chosen for zero-configuration persistence, perfect for local development and small-to-medium deployments. Prisma acts as the ORM for type-safe database interactions.

### Vector Store: ChromaDB

**Decision**: Run ChromaDB locally via Docker.
**Tradeoff**: Self-hosting ChromaDB requires managing the container/volume, but it keeps data private and avoids external cloud vector DB costs/latency during development.

### Scraper: Puppeteer

**Decision**: Used Puppeteer (headless Chrome) instead of simple HTML parsers (like Cheerio).
**Tradeoff**: Puppeteer is heavier and slower, but it's maximizing reliability. Many modern documentation sites rely heavily on JavaScript (SPAs), which simple parsers essentially see as empty pages. Puppeteer ensures we capture the actual rendered content.

### RAG Pipeline

**Decision**: Simple "Retrieve-then-Generate" pipeline using OpenAI embeddings.
**Tradeoff**: Currently retrieves top-k chunks based on semantic similarity. A more advanced setup might include a re-ranking step or hybrid search (keyword + refreshing) to improve accuracy on specific terms, but this baseline provides strong general performance.

## Chunking & Tokenization Strategy

The system relies on a **semantic-preserving** chunking strategy to ensure that retrieved context is both coherent and fits within the LLM's context window.

### 1. Tokenization (`tiktoken`)

We use `tiktoken` to count tokens exactly as the LLM sees them. This prevents "context window overflow" errors that can happen if you rely on simple character or word counts (where 1000 characters could randomly be 200 or 500 tokens).

### 2. Hierarchical Chunking

Instead of arbitrarily slicing text every $N$ characters, we use a paragraph-first approach:

1.  **Paragraphs**: Text is first split by double newlines (`\n\n`). We attempt to group whole paragraphs into a chunk until the `MAX_CHUNK_TOKENS` (500) limit is reached. This preserves the flow of ideas.
2.  **Sentences**: If a single paragraph exceeds the limit, we fall back to splitting by sentences (using regex for `.!?`).
3.  **Hard Cut**: In the rare case of a massive sentence (e.g., a long code block or legal disclaimer) exceeding the limit, we perform a hard token-level slice to ensure strict compliance.

**Why this design?**

- **Context Quality**: Models perform better when given complete thoughts. Cutting a sentence in half destroys its semantic meaning, leading to poor embeddings and irrelevant retrieval.
- **Efficiency**: 500 tokens is a "sweet spot" — large enough to contain a full answer context, but small enough to retrieve multiple diverse chunks (top-k=5) without blowing up the prompt cost.

Commit message:

docs: Enhance README with ChromaDB rationale, scalability challenges, and production recommendations.

README.md, after:

# RAG Assignment Backend

A backend service for a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system, built with Node.js, Express, and OpenAI.

## Repository

[https://github.com/phaneendra/rag-assignment-backend](https://github.com/phaneendra/rag-assignment-backend)

## Overview

This service handles:

1.  **Web Scraping**: Extracting content from URLs using Puppeteer.
2.  **Vector Storage**: Embedding and storing document chunks in ChromaDB.
3.  **Chat Completion**: Answering user queries using context retrieved from the vector store via OpenAI.
4.  **History Management**: Persisting conversation history in SQLite.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js (v18+)
- Docker & Docker Compose (for ChromaDB)
- OpenAI API Key

## Setup Instructions

### 1. Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/phaneendra/rag-assignment-backend.git
cd rag-assignment-backend
```

### 2. Install dependencies

```bash
npm install
```

### 3. Environment Configuration

Create a `.env` file in the root directory:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Ensure the following variables are set:

```env
PORT=5001
DATABASE_URL="file:./dev.db"
OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
CHROMA_DB_URL="http://localhost:8000"
```

### 4. Run the Application

#### Option A: Local Development (Recommended)

Use this method for faster feedback loops.

1.  **Start ChromaDB**:
    ```bash
    docker compose up -d chromadb
    ```
2.  **Start the Server**:
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```
    This command automatically runs database migrations and starts the server in watch mode.

#### Option B: Docker Compose (Full Stack)

Run the entire backend stack (App + ChromaDB) in containers.

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
```

The API will be available at `http://localhost:5001`.

## Design Decisions & Tradeoffs

### Architecture: Express & Node.js

**Decision**: Used Express for its simplicity and huge ecosystem.

### Database: SQLite & Prisma

**Decision**: SQLite was chosen for zero-configuration persistence, perfect for local development and small-to-medium deployments. Prisma acts as the ORM for type-safe database interactions.

### Vector Store: ChromaDB

### Vector Store: ChromaDB

**Decision**: Use ChromaDB running locally via Docker.
**Rationale**: Chroma is open-source, lightweight, and offers a great developer experience for local setups without needing an external API key or cloud provisioning. It supports persistent storage easily.
**Tradeoff**: Self-hosting means managing the infrastructure. For valid production use cases, a managed service (like Pinecone or Weaviate Cloud) would offload operational complexity (backups, scaling).

### Scraper: Puppeteer

**Decision**: Used Puppeteer (headless Chrome) instead of simple HTML parsers (like Cheerio).
**Tradeoff**: Puppeteer is heavier and slower, but it's maximizing reliability. Many modern documentation sites rely heavily on JavaScript (SPAs), which simple parsers essentially see as empty pages. Puppeteer ensures we capture the actual rendered content.

### RAG Pipeline

**Decision**: Simple "Retrieve-then-Generate" pipeline using OpenAI embeddings.
**Tradeoff**: Currently retrieves top-k chunks based on semantic similarity. A more advanced setup might include a re-ranking step or hybrid search (keyword + refreshing) to improve accuracy on specific terms, but this baseline provides strong general performance.

## Chunking & Tokenization Strategy

The system relies on a **semantic-preserving** chunking strategy to ensure that retrieved context is both coherent and fits within the LLM's context window.

### 1. Tokenization (`tiktoken`)

We use `tiktoken` to count tokens exactly as the LLM sees them. This prevents "context window overflow" errors that can happen if you rely on simple character or word counts (where 1000 characters could randomly be 200 or 500 tokens).

### 2. Hierarchical Chunking

Instead of arbitrarily slicing text every $N$ characters, we use a paragraph-first approach:

1.  **Paragraphs**: Text is first split by double newlines (`\n\n`). We attempt to group whole paragraphs into a chunk until the `MAX_CHUNK_TOKENS` (500) limit is reached. This preserves the flow of ideas.
2.  **Sentences**: If a single paragraph exceeds the limit, we fall back to splitting by sentences (using regex for `.!?`).
3.  **Hard Cut**: In the rare case of a massive sentence (e.g., a long code block or legal disclaimer) exceeding the limit, we perform a hard token-level slice to ensure strict compliance.

**Why this design?**

- **Context Quality**: Models perform better when given complete thoughts. Cutting a sentence in half destroys its semantic meaning, leading to poor embeddings and irrelevant retrieval.
- **Efficiency**: 500 tokens is a "sweet spot" — large enough to contain a full answer context, but small enough to retrieve multiple diverse chunks (top-k=5) without blowing up the prompt cost.

## What Breaks at Scale

As the application grows from a prototype to a production system, several bottlenecks will emerge:

1.  **SQLite Concurrency**: SQLite is excellent for read-heavy workloads but locks the database during writes. High volumes of concurrent chat logs or document indexing jobs will encounter `SQLITE_BUSY` errors.
2.  **Puppeteer Resource Usage**: Headless Chrome is extremely memory and CPU intensive. Launching a browser instance for every scraping request will quickly crash the server under load.
3.  **Vector Search Latency**: As the number of embeddings grows into the millions, flat index search becomes too slow. Approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) indexing tuning is required, which Chroma handles, but resource requirements (RAM) will spike.
4.  **Single-Threaded Node.js**: Heavy computational tasks (like parsing massive text files or calculating embeddings) can block the main event loop, making the API unresponsive to other requests.

## Going to Production

To address the limitations above, the following architectural changes are recommended:

1.  **Database Migration**: Switch from SQLite to **PostgreSQL**. It handles high concurrency gracefully and supports native vector extensions (pgvector) if we wanted to consolidate infrastructure.
2.  **Async Job Queue**: Decouple scraping from the HTTP request-response cycle. Use a message queue (Redis/BullMQ) to process URLs in the background. This prevents browser crashes from killing the API server.
3.  **Managed Vector Store**: Move to a managed provider (Pinecone, AWS OpenSearch, or Chroma Cloud) to handle replication, sharding, and high availability.
4.  **Rate Limiting & Caching**: Implement Redis-based rate limiting to prevent abuse and cache frequent queries to save on OpenAI costs and reduce latency.
